Were there ever any Aggie pranks in your classes in
those early years?
Any good bull stuff?
Let's see. I remember as a high school teacher, a
hamburger cheese being put on the doorknob. No, I
can't. I think the students were just incredibly
good.
Describe your workload and the courses that you
started off teaching.
I remember developing a course on the foundations
of education, and I think I taught three courses.
Foundations of Education, the History and
Philosophy of Education,
and I can't remember. All right, these were for
undergraduates. These were all undergraduate
classes. Normally what year?
Well, supposedly the junior year. I think
education courses prior to the third year did not
count. So they were mainly junior and seniors. And
I think I had several sections, maybe When I talk
about three classes, I'm talking about two
sections of one of these. But in my first few years,
I taught a number of—developed a lot of different
courses, including comparative,
and then started developing graduate-level
courses in history and philosophy. About how many
per section in those years?
The class room I had was not air-conditioned. It
was up on the fourth floor, and I think it held about
ninety.
I usually had a pretty full class, and that would be
a couple sections. We also taught two courses each
summer session, so the summer sessions were
really murderous because everything was
condensed. I always believed in essays and
papers. I was very busy, especially in the summer,
to get everything graded. In those long semester
classes, you normally gave how many tests and what
other assignments? I always would have pretty
much daily reading, and I would have occasional
quizzes pop and other when announced. And then I
would have, I think generally I would write about
three major tests in the final. which I soon
learned seniors didn't have to take. Graduating
seniors. Graduating seniors.
And then I would have a major paper. And you didn't
have a graduate assistant in those years? No.
Well, I did at one time have a graduate assistant, I
asked not to have one in there because he took too
much of my time talking. I enjoyed talking to him,
and I liked to see the papers myself, but he did help
with attendance and things like that. It was
helpful, but he took more of my time than I think he
saved, so I didn't need it. But I could have had
help. And your classes, normally the classrooms
were in the academic building. Yes, and then
occasionally I had a class in that little annex
where the library,
not the library but the Harrington Annex is the two
floor building. They had a little shack kind of a
building there. At that time, what was your
evaluation of the library holdings in the areas of
education? I was pleasantly surprised. Of
course, I had come from a small liberal arts
college where education was not at all respected.
And the library here was much, much better. And
they were very helpful in ordering books. And of
course, they had journals, the major journals
that I needed. And I was pleased with the library.
Of course, the library was making great strides at
that time. Did you get any impression of the status
that education had on this campus? Well, I thought
it was held in high regard, which surprised me. I
think Dean Hubert probably helped create that
feeling. One of my first articles for publication
was on the history of the lower class status of
education in higher ed. I compared it to the lower
class status of the minorities. went back to the
days in the ancient world where if you lived a bad
life, you came back in the next life as a teacher or a
fishmonger. Now, he would be the dean of education
for about seven or eight years. Yes. Describe him
as you and your colleagues saw him as dean. He was
always hovering. The hovering is important
because you always wanted to be on your toes in case
he showed up, and you wanted to be in your office,
and you wanted to be busy. He was very
conscientious, and you never knew if he was angry
or not. And when I worked with him on some lecture
things. He would ask questions like, how many
people do you expect at this session? And I had no
way of knowing, but he expected an answer. He
expected you to know everything, which I think was
a good mode of operation because you always were
prepared. He was a very strong dean. I think he said
General Patton was his model. Make believe that I
did not know him. Describe him physically. He's
very tall and lean, very handsome,
strong features. He's slightly bent forward as he
walked, and he engaged you very seriously at all
times. He was a very serious man, but I think, of
course, he also had a sense of humor, but that was
not displayed ordinarily. What kind of hours did
he keep working? I think he was there all the time.
Was there a key secretary in the dean's office? Oh,
yes, Peggy. Ritchie. Ritchie, yes, Peggy. She was
just wonderful. And also Brian Cole was assisting
Dean Hubert. In fact, I had him as a student in one of
the undergraduate classes when he was applying to
be certified to teach. And he was outstanding from
the very beginning. Was McCandless in the dean's
office yet? Yes, McCandless was there. I had one of
his daughters in class. Yes, and he was a very fine
man. What was his part of the leadership? What was
his task? Frankly, I don't remember.
I don't remember his title, but I do remember
working with him when we wanted to get students to
go abroad. This was around the early 1980s. He was
our liaison with the regents or the directors in
trying to get us to have study abroad programs in
comparative education, which was partly my
field. And he helped us get that through, and I
think outside of foreign languages, education
was quite early in getting study abroad going. As
you began to understand the College of Education,
were there any areas that we were not covering here
that surprised you? Or in reverse, were there some
areas we were covering that were a little unusual?
In terms of the curriculum? Well, the course, I had
been told that when I came there would be more
Foundation people, but they never got any more. So
I had the whole program.
So I really never got off the ground the way I wanted
to have, where we could have more in-depth. You
can't teach the history of the world in one
semester, or at least the to any degree of
significance, so I would have to take certain
periods and develop them. But I never, never until
near my retirement did we ever get any more people
that were trained somewhat in the foundations.
But this is true all over the country. The
foundations were declining with the rise of more
competency-based education. They didn't know
just what the foundations were doing. And my
vision, of course, is that they were to create the
liberal art dimension of the teacher. Were there
any areas that we included that surprised you that
many education programs were not? Well, this is
the beginning of behavioral objectives.
Behaviorism was beginning to take over
education. This was not just here, but I think they
were going stronger here than where I had been
previously. Of course, behavioral objectives
stressed the kinds of learning that could be
observed and not the kind of learning that raised
questions and provoked thought. and I was never on
that side of this movement, many courses were
developed that you had to list the objectives to be
obtained.
Of course, I sometimes think the most important
objectives are ones we're not sure of when we
start. However, I must say that behavioral
objectives did tend to lead us toward the road
where we wanted to go and made us stick to it. As you
began to settle in to this institution, describe
your reaction to Aggie traditions. Well, of
course, the bonfire was the most burning
tradition. Did you and your family attend? Oh,
yes. I brought the family. My youngest son was on my
shoulders. He's the only one that could see.
We just enjoyed it. Of course, all along the
campus, each cadet would say, And as some people
said, they got houtied to death walking across
campus, but it was so friendly and so spirited. And
I would always check on the freshmen that were
coming in each year, and I would overhear their
work that they were doing and watched them polish
Sully. And it struck me that this is unique, this
university, and it's more than just a community of
students. It is a community. Did you ever go to
Silver Taps early? Yes. I never went to Midnight
Yale. I never did that. I must admit, I'm waiting
until I can stay up that late. What about, did you go
to Muster early, in the early years? Oh, yes, Aggie
Muster. It was my mother's birthday, by the way,
April 21st, and I believe the first Muster was the
year of her birth, 1903. I've read that somewhere.
Of course, it goes back to San Jacinto, but I think
the tradition. My mother loved it, too. She always
wanted to go. I think the muster was probably the
most significant part of the tradition. Now, how
did you and the family become part of the
community? Describe settling in. Well, I think
the My department head, as I say, invited us over.
Many of the faculty exchanged dinners. We went to
the First Presbyterian Church, and they were
very, very friendly in getting us established and
getting acquainted. And of course, there were
faculty meetings and the yearly president
reception. But we were starting to get to be too big
to be a family, I think. I don't recall any problems
adjusting to the community. What about the school
system? The school system, the children just took
right to that. I had some problems with the way they
were teaching, but I never said anything. What was
your evaluation of the comparative quality of
this school system and the one that you left in
Pennsylvania? I would say that they were About the
same. The one we left in Pennsylvania was nothing
to brag about. We had been in New Jersey prior to
that, and I think, although my oldest daughter had
just started school, I think they had a little
better facilities there. But I was always quite
pleased, and the children were happy in school. I
think the teachers were very conscientious. My
only feeling was there's more memory in reading
the textbook and reciting it. But that was true
everywhere, I think. Where did you all do your
shopping?
Well, there was Piggly Wiggly, I remember, and
Orr's bought them out, and my children called it
Piggly Orr Wiggly. And then I think there was
another one down there where the Taste of China is.
There was a little grocery store where the Thruway
town, the bypass is. I think there was a Kroger's
downtown. The
Townshire Shopping Center? Yes. The Townshire
was just developed, I think, but there was another
one on the—or Brown Shoe— At Villa Maria, that one—
That one was—isn't that the Townshire? No,
Townshire was the one on down Texas going north. Oh
yeah, yes, that was there. I was thinking of that
one on Briarcrest. I think it's Briarcrest. Or
Villa Maria, whatever. In those early years, what
did you and your family do for relaxation?
Well, I worked all the time, and I think this is why I
lost my family. But we did take trips. We went to Big
Bend, one of the first, I think it was spring
vacation. We loved that. And we went to Galveston
and Six Flags. My family went back to New Jersey in
the summers when I worked so hard. My
mother-in-law was a widow, and she had a little
weekend farm, and they enjoyed that. So they went
for a few weeks every summer. We generally
traveled, but I couldn't take vacation when the
students, when classes were going. Then between
classes was my big time for research. And then, of
course, I had two classes each, summer sessions.
So it was not easy to get away. But there were so many
things to do around town, and the children were
involved in many activities with the school. We
played tennis.
How easy was it to become a Texan? Well, I fell right
in, but I think my wife, it took her a while. She was
used to the New York scene. But I just took to it
right away, and I loved the warm weather. Having
grown up in Chicago, I had enough of that ice and
snow. I couldn't believe that people lived here
before air conditioning. I got used to air
conditioning right away. Of course, I was worried
about the expense, and I was going to issue tickets
to the children so they couldn't go in and out so
often. But it was comfortable. This is a note to the
typist. You don't need to include this in the typed
version, but I remember a lady calling in a call-in
show on KTRH in Houston many years ago, and the
emcee's name was Alvin Van Black, and this lady
said, Alvin, how did y'all live in Houston before
air conditioning? And he gave her a two-word
answer, more slowly. But what I remember as a
graduate student at Rice, the landlady from whom I
rented a room did most of her housework before 10 in
the morning. Then she closed the blinds, closed
the shades, closed the curtains, and she did
sedentary things. She didn't cook any lunch. She
ate something out of the refrigerator that was
cool. And so her theory was she was keeping the cool
air in the house. And then at about six o'clock, in
the real hot months, then she opened everything up
and then she went out and did things in the yard and
she went shopping and so forth. But that was her
answer. That's the way to do it. We can adjust
anything, I believe. But I found the warm weather
very, very nice. All right, now you mentioned
research. What were you researching in the 70s? In
the 70s, I was mainly working on the history of the
lower class to see how lower class people were
educated. And when I moved into the education of
children, I mean the history of children, which we
know it's a little about. There are very few
documents on that. We tell about our childhood,
but we look at it through different eyes when we're
adults. Then that became one of my major concerns.
Then I developed a biography, starting with
Frances Parker. I did a biography of Senator
Yarborough Where did you find the materials for
those research efforts? Well, except for the
Parker, I didn't have the full-life research. But
for Yarborough, I managed to visit him and his wife
in Austin.
And then, of course, a lot of this was in the
congressional records and so on. Those were
easily accessible presidential papers. This is
Senator Ralph Yarbrough, who was for many years an
active leader of what was then considered liberal
wing of the Democratic Party in Texas. Yes, and he
apparently, of course, in addition to getting the
Bilingual Act through, he told me in the secret
session, or the closed session, his vote got the
Civil Rights Bill through.
The history of childhood was just developing with
Array's work on the centuries of childhood, and
sources there are hard to come by. We don't have a
lot of diaries of children and so on, so much of my
material had to be secondary. And you published
this where? Well, there were several journals
that I worked with. One, the Educational Studies
was the major vehicle of the American Association
of Educational Studies, and I also published in
Progressive Education, which died out about this
time.
Oh.
The Forum. My mind is going up. Educational
Thought, Philosophy of Education Journal. I was
the founder of the International Society for
Educational Biography, first president in 1982.
That's still, and that journal was called Vitae
Scholastae. What was your most, of your early
publications, of which one were you most proud?
Which was the most important of your early? Well, I
think my work with Francis Parker. And then I did an
additional work on his wife, who was a feminist,
early feminist, called The Colonel's Lady. Then I
got very much interested in qualitative
research. I think my inside lives, the
qualitative dimension of education, was
probably my most important work, which was
published in a book called Qualitative
Education. In those early years, how were
individual faculty members in education, how
were they evaluated? How did you know whether you
were proceeding well or not? Well, I believe from
the very beginning we had student evaluation
forms. And we would discuss the results of these
with the department head.
It was rather very informal. Of course, later on it
became more technical with the documentation and
so on. This was mainly just going over our student
evaluations. And I got some cute evaluations. I
remember one student, if only they'd give Dr.
Campbell something good to teach. Too much
history. But the students were always very, very
kind. But I think that's the only way we were
evaluated. And of course, going up for promotion
was another matter. Now you came with what rank? I
came as an associate
professor, I think, and head of the department at
Lycoming, and three years later I was eligible for
tenure, and I think then I made professor.
But I came as an associate.
salaries and promotions on a merit basis as far as
you would know? They were not merit as far as I knew.
Here? No, I don't remember. They may have been, and
of course the department head was the one who
decided. I was never much interested in salaries
and what was going on. I just wanted to do the best I
could. I'm sure there was some merit, but later on I
think it was formally. I don't like to think of
merit. I believe teachers should not be competing
with one another.
describe the program when you got here. Was there a
master's degree already approved when you
arrived? I believe there was. I believe that we had
a master's, but I was not teaching at graduate
level for several years. It may have just been
approved. We were approved of our certification
in various fields, and
we were still developing elementary and
secondary program, continually revising
curriculum. Our faculty meetings were always
just continually revising. It was a very pioneer
kind of time.
I can't recall now about the master's, but it was
several years before I developed graduate
courses. And then they cut all the foundations of
the undergraduate, which I didn't think was a good
idea. So then I just was at the graduate level. What
were some marks of the progress that the College of
Education was making?
As I say, we were developing the behavioral
objective almost to the extent that courses were
series of behaviors.
I think the College of Education was very avant
garde. In the beginning, we were not even known in
the state of Texas. They didn't know that Texas A&M
had a College of Education. I think we were still
getting developed. I was also the advisor for the
Texas
Education Society, and many of these students did
not know. When they went to conferences, they were
not known. But the college soon became very
visible in the state and was producing more and
more students. I'm sorry that I don't have the
figures. I'm sure they're officially documented
somewhere. Which other schools in Texas do you
think were the most highly regarded in education?
Well, of course, the University of Texas. I had a
couple of Columbia friends who taught in the
College of Education there in Austin. I don't
think there was, in foundations, there was
nothing to compare. And of course, they were much
farther ahead than we were. They had four or five
foundation people.
I did attend some meetings down at the University
of Houston, and they were going wild on this school
without walls, which developed all over Houston.
And one time I taught an off-campus course in one of
those buildings where there's no walls. You have
to just give people worksheets. I mean, there's no
way you can talk if you have a loud voice next door.
But they were kind of avant-garde in that. Of
course, Rice was not known for his education, but
that of course was the the elite school of Texas.
But I think in my field it was definitely the
University of Texas. Now Sherman had a good—I knew
people at Sherman in foundations. That was now the
University of North Texas, I think. You mean
Denton? Denton. I'm sorry. I'm so sorry.
Correct me, my faulty memory, it was in Denton.
Sherman is where Martha went to college, Austin
College. Yeah, and yours truly is in Austin
College. Did you go to Austin College? I'd
forgotten that. She loved it there and I thought it
was marvelous. Oh, it was great for me. They had a
five-year education program. My great honor came
two falls ago. I was the 150th anniversary
sesquicentennial speaker. Oh, for goodness
sakes. Well, you know, that is one of the oldest
schools, and I think it was originally somewhere
in Huntsville, wasn't it? That's right. They
moved it up to Sherman because of malaria and
yellow fever. And they had an opera house, and it
was bigger than Dallas, wasn't it? Yes. I recall
picking up little things. Oh, yes. The campus
leadership, Jack Williams and John Calhoun, What
did you and your colleagues think of Jack Williams
and John Calhoun as the president and the vice
president? Very highly, very highly. And I was in
several meetings with Calhoun when I was with TACT
and other organizations and thought so highly of
him. But Williams was the, I think, the
inspiration for everybody. Describe their
manner and their style. Well, Williams was a very
smooth lecturer,
but he was also very available. He would sometimes
sit down in the cafeteria and talk to faculty.
I think you had the feeling that he was on your side
and he was trying to develop high standards,
working to make this a great university, but he was
very friendly in style. I think Calhoun was too.
Calhoun was a little more impure.